there's a lot of attention on why Hamas
carried out the attack on Israel now and
there's one factor America has
highlighted here's one thing that's uh
that's clear uh we've been actively
working on trying to help Israel and
Saudi Arabia normalize their relations
normalize here means to establish formal
ties such as setting up embassies and
creating other diplomatic and economic
links and America believes the Hamas
attack May connect to this push for
normalization
now who's opposed to that Hamas
Hezbollah Iran uh so I think that speaks
volumes Hamas is an islamist militant
group based in Gaza Hezbollah is an
islamist militant group based in Lebanon
both groups are armed and funded by Iran
all three consider themselves part of a
resistance to Israel and on the Hamas
attack the UN is unequivocal its
Secretary General says nothing can
justify these acts of Terror but Hamas
has tried to justify the attack it cites
what it calls Israel's crimes against
the Palestinians and its repeated
storming of alaka mosque that's a
reference to the actions of Israeli
police at Jerusalem's most important
holy site for Muslims and for Jews and
this year has been the deadliest on
record for Palestinians in the Israeli
occupied West Bank though Israel has
defended its actions throughout Hamas
will also have known its attack was
almost 50 years to the day since a
surprise attack by Egypt and Syria on
the Jewish holy day of yum kapor there
was something else in hamas's list of
grievances normalization that same
factor that America pointed to so let's
look at this because what's being called
normalization is in fact far from normal
in the region because for decades most
Arab states didn't recognize the state
of Israel in 2020 that started to change
the US broker deals with the United Arab
Emirates and Bahrain in which they
normalized relations with Israel but
Palestinians weren't involved neither
the Palestinian Authority in the West
Bank led by makad Abbas nor Hamas which
controls Gaza and they both denounced
the normalization deals at the time
BBC's Jeremy Bowen explained that the
new agreement breaks a long-standing
Arab consensus that the price of normal
relations with Israel was Independence
for the Palestinians in other words in
the eyes of its critics normalization
weakens the Palestinian cause and now
the US is brokering new normalization
talks that are even more significant
this time with Saudi Arabia one of the
Region's most powerful countries and in
September Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu visited Washington
and he expressed hope that what he
called a historic peace with the Saudis
was possible I think such a peace would
go a long way first to advance the end
of the Arab Israeli conflict uh achieve
reconciliation between the Islamic world
and the Jewish State and Advance a
genuine peace between us well on the
Palestinians and unlike previous
normalization talks this time
Palestinians have been involved but not
all Palestinians in September a high
level Saudi delegation visited the
occupied West Bank for the first time in
decades it met Mahmud Abbas leader of
the Palestinian Authority now to be
clear there's no deal yet the US has
said the talks are incredibly difficult
but to supporters of normalization the
prize here is huge in the words of one
Israeli newspaper Saudi Israel
normalization would transform the Middle
East but this push for better Saudi
Israel relations has left Hamas wanting
to derail the process Hamas officials
have mentioned that they want to send a
message to um their to Arab leaders that
they can't be ignored that Arabs can't
just make deals with Israel and expect
to get peace Iran had a message too this
is its supreme leader in early October
before the Hamas
attack countries that use the gamble of
normalization with the Zionist regime as
a method for themselves will lose and a
loss awaits them they are making a
mistake Zionist regime is a reference to
Israel Iran refuses to use Israel's name
it also denies being behind the Hamas
attack and americ says it's not seen
evidence that it was and if Iran and
Hamas have points to make on
normalization so does Israel since the
attack its US ambassador has urged
everyone who has a stake in peace and
normalization in the Middle East should
support an outcome that would deal a
blow to Iran and its proxies to Israel
to the UN the US the UK the EU and many
others no reason can justify this mass
murder of civilians this war crime but
in quite different ways Hamas and
America both say normalization was a
factor in why this attack happened now
America and Israel's desire for
normalization is matched by hamas's
desire to stop it for now though Israel
is in shock in mourning and at War
normalization will have to wait